Can an application be a monolith and microservices
at the same time?
In this talk, we will prove that it can be done.
It's mostly demos, but we also need a bit of
information to align on the subject.
Let me first ask you a question.
Is there anybody who does not know who Erwin
Schrödinger was?
Well, okay, I will tell you.
Erwin Schrödinger was a scientist who created a
thought experiment with a cat in a box,
to illustrate the paradoxes and peculiarities of
the quantum theory,
especially the concept of superposition and the
problem of measurement.
In other words, things can be in any state until
you measure it.
Next, I will show you an example of what he meant.
I think you recognize this laptop received an update.
But does it work or is it broken?
We only know that by opening the laptop and have
a look.
This is the same principle as Schrödinger's cat.
But does this also relate to software applications?
In other words, can we build a Schrödinger app?
Let's dive into it.
My name is John Meeuwissen.
I'm 61.
I started my career way back in 1979 as a mainframe
programmer.
I shifted to system programming and later
software-oriented architecture,
middleware integrations.
More recently, I worked in low-code development,
the back-up product,
and then shifted to software development,
full stack and open source with JavaScript,
TypeScript.
And personally, I'm a grandfather of 11.
Let's now first align on the subject by looking at
some data from market research.
Apparently, 13% of the companies were not able to
find us.
But apart from that, there's one big challenge.
54% of the companies think that adapting to changing
client requirements is the biggest challenge of
software development.
As we all know, architecture is fundamental.
And even when the code is set up modular,
application modules are layered like this,
like Lego blocks.
Let us have a look at some problems caused by this
sort of application development.
First of all, implementing changes often requires
refactoring of the application and its architecture.
The deeper you have to go, the more it hurts.
In other words, the more Lego blocks you have to
remove and build up again.
Secondly, refactoring the architecture basically
means rebuilding the whole application or at least
parts of it.
As we can only design for today and not for
tomorrow,
that's giving us a lot of uncertainty.
When designing the application, we want to make an
architecture as future-proof as possible.
So you have the least need to change it in the
future.
But how can we make future-proof decisions when the
direction of the business constantly changes?
This forces it also constantly to adapt the
architecture to the current needs.
But that's giving us a lot of time because of the
Lego block architecture.
The continuous architecting.
Based on the uncertainty in the architecture,
we are forced to constantly change the architecture.
In the past years, microservices has been the way
to go.
But now, since we know they come with a cost,
the monolith gains popularity again.
Modern struggles.
As microservices bring value in relation to
scalability and fault tolerance,
we want to be able to shift our architecture
towards them and away from them when needed.
But we don't want to change the architecture
every time.
What we think might help is a separation
of concerns.
This way, we don't have to bother about
the architecture at development and
the possible deployment strategies.
So what we would like to have is a just-in-time
architecture deployment model that easily adapts
to our needs.
So develop as a monolith and deploy it in any
shape you need or like.
But this requires the application to be in
a strong modular structure.
This is an example of an application structure
that strongly adapts to the just-in-time
architecture style.
It is decomposed by resource modules like post,
rating, reaction, etc., and it has the basic
layering as above.
This modular application structure allows
for slicing.
First of all, vertical slicing.
This can improve performance and fault tolerance.
For example, you can load balance over multiple
split-off modules that are having high load.
Second, you can separate the impact of failures
in split-off functions from critical
basic modules.
This modular structure also allows for horizontal
splitting.
For the same reasons as performance, fault tolerance,
and security.
For instance, performance, you can split off the read
and write operations and separate them in multiple
segments for performance.
Or you can improve security by putting the database,
for instance, in the DMZ.
Currently, there are two solutions aiming at splitting
of a modular monolith into different services
at any time.
The first one is Service Weaver.
It's from Google and it strongly focuses on the cloud.
It supports the Go language.
They offer a framework and their scope is backend.
The second option is Jitar.
That's an abbreviation for Just-in-Time Architecture
and it's created by Masking Technology.
It supports JavaScript, TypeScript.
What we offer is a runtime and our scope is full stack.
Today's pick will be Jitar.
Demo time.
In a moment, I will show you three different
deployment options.
The first one will be the monolith by running it as
a single page segment on the server with only
the backend for frontend functionality exposed.
Next, we will split off the notification function
and later load balance it.
And finally, we will split off all read and write
operations and put them in different segments
on different servers.
To demonstrate these scenarios, we will make use of
our showcase application Comify.
It's a social media app.
It's a single page responsive application that can run
on the web browser, tablet, or phone.
And the technical stack is, it's running on Node.js,
Jitar of course, React for the web UI and Java,
TypeScript for the backend, and Keycloak for
the authentication, Mongo for the database,
and MinIO for the file system.
I'm a bit bigger.
Sorry.
You have the profile, you have a timeline.
You can explore for other comics or other creators.
And here you can see who's following you
or who you are following.
If you have a look at there, you can find their comics.
And you can react with another comic
or you can react with a comment.
That's about the application.
Okay.
Let's now have a closer look at Jitar.
It's important to mention that this talk is about
the concept.
It's not selling Jitar.
For two reasons.
First of all, it's open source anyway.
And secondly, it's not ready for production yet.
Okay.
Well, Jitar is a runtime we deliver and important
thing is that it automates all client-server
communication based on segments.
It supports end-to-end type safety.
And maybe most important, it's by configuration only.
So there's not a single line of Jitar code in your
application code.
It also brings some powerful features like
segmentation.
So you can split up your application in any
deployable part and deploy it distributed.
It also does orchestration over the segmented
functions.
And it automatically does load balancing.
Now, I'm going to show you the different scenarios.
First of all, currently the application is running
in, like I said, a standalone mode.
So everything is in one single segment.
Well, what Jitar does, it works with segments,
like I said.
By the way, is it readable for everybody?
Also in the back?
Okay.
Well, I will first introduce the segments.
The segments contain what will be split up.
This is, for instance, the BFF segment.
Here you expose all your features that you want to
publish.
And with access is public, then everybody can use it.
There's also private.
That means that this function can only be called
within the segment.
I also have some other segment files I prepared for
the demo.
Then we have services.
Like I said, I now run the application with
standalone.
And then you can see it will start up the node,
the gateway, repository, everything.
And it loads a segment that that's the BFF.
So that's the only one.
But now, and like I said, this is running currently.
And you can see, like I showed, it works.
Now, I'm going to split off the notifications.
So I have to make this segment available for Jitar.
Because it takes all the segment files that are
called JSON, segment or JSON.
Okay.
Then, changing segments, you always need to rebuild
the application.
Now.
Yes.
As you can see, it now builds the BFF segment only.
No.
Yeah.
Here you can now see it built the notification
and the BFF segment.
Okay.
Then we have to start up.
The repository first.
Okay.
Then run the gateway.
Then run the proxy.
And then run the BFF segment.
But we now also have a notification segment.
So you also need this.
And you can see he exposes the notification segment,
the notification features.
If we now go back,
you will see that the application still works.
And now if I ask for notifications,
you will see that suddenly the notification segment
gets a call for his feature.
And the rest is just running in the BFF.
Okay.
Now, I will start second notification segment.
And if I look at the gateway here,
you will say, "Hey, I added a worker."
So the segment is automatically registered
at the gateway and will run it.
If we now go back and run notifications again,
you will see that it went to the other segment.
And if you do it again,
you'll see it went to the first segment again.
And so on.
Round robin load balancing automatically.
Now, I will split off the reads and the writes also.
So I have to make them active segments for data.
I have to stop all the workers.
And now I can rebuild the application.
And you will now see that he built four segments.
And then, oh, sorry.
I have to start all the workers again.
I have to run the BFF again.
Yes, so run the BFF.
Run the notifications again.
And now we have new segments.
We have to start the reads.
And you have to start the writes.
And if we now go back, it still works as if nothing
happened.
But if you now look, you will see that here,
this is the read segment.
It will suddenly get all the reads.
And you can see that again, the notifications are sent
to the single notification segment again.
And if we for instance say, "I like this post,"
a notification will be created.
So indeed, you will see here in the write segment
activity.
Well, but talk is cheap.
Let's show me the code.
Okay.
Time to take a look at the state of the application.
There are a number of things you have to stick to
to make it possible.
How you set up your application code is important
to make it work this way.
So if we look, we have web UI containing all
the React components.
We have integrations containing all our integrations
like Keycloak, Mongo, MinIO, et cetera.
And we have of course the assets.
And on the domain level, the highest level is features.
It's all containing a single feature.
It's modular.
And it's in, that's about the architecture.
It's a modular design.
The highest level is feature and in React,
in the web UI, it are all React components.
Then the database management.
One important thing, we only can work with
immutable objects.
And there must be no relation in the database.
Referential integrity is in the application.
And to support that, we work with sagas.
Yes, this is an example of the add of post with the saga.
Then for security, for access, we have Keycloak
with OpenID.
The security of the data, we have an authorization
model of ownership.
It means you can see everything, but you can only
change what's yours.
And we make use of data aggregation for the BFF.
So that means we aggregate all data for the web UI.
So you only have to show to them what you would like
them to see.
Things you don't want to expose to them, you can just
leave them out of the aggregation.
Okay.
And function calls are secured by the code so-called
Jitar trust key.
That's a trust key to specify at the cluster level.
Let's have a look.
No, sorry.
It's in the services.
Yes.
Here, we have a trust key.
That's used on the cluster level of Jitar.
And it makes sure that every function call will be
checked if it has access mode protected.
The function can only be called if the caller has
the same trust key.
And again, the function will only run if the caller
also has the same trust key as the segment has.
So that's how we secure function calls.
So, as you can see here, this is for the post that
all on feature level.
So that's about it.
Are there any questions?
You have a microphone?
So my question is, those constraints, how are they
For example, if I import the database directly from
a place I shouldn't be, will the...
Because I presume we have to compile it to something
first, right?
No, just build your application.
Yeah, okay.
When you build, will I be warned if I import
something that I shouldn't be?
We work with integrations and the database is not
dynamically imported.
It's imported when you build your application.
You make somewhere an import of the database.
But that's in a function.
And you can...
That function is protected by the Jitar trust key.
Okay, I see.
So basically, the function that you showed us in the
ðšðšŽðšŠðšðšžðš›ðšŽ.ðšðšœ, that basically gets injected all the
dependencies that it needs, and we access it through
the object that gets passed to the function?
Yeah.
Well, all functions are exposed default, exported
default.
And you just do the imports in every function.
You do the import that you needs over there.
Yes? I see, I see.
And in the segment, you only specify the features
that you want to expose public to the BFF or
protected, so only within the application.
And that way, the databases database access is
protected.
I see.
So if I do something I shouldn't, the build is going
to fail, basically.
The build when you do npm run build is going to fail?
Or is it going to fail during runtime?
Well, which protection of the database do you mean?
You mentioned that the database access is protected
by some keys, right?
And let's say I violated some of the rules identified
defined by Jitar in the configuration, in some of
the JSON.
And then if that were to happen, will the build fail
during build, or will the application fail when
someone calls that function?
I don't quite understand.
I mean, you import databases in one of the functions
of your application, yes?
Well, if that import works, then the database
connection is only available to that function.
And that function can only be called by trusted other
functions that call it.
Oh, I see.
Okay, yeah, I get it.
Yeah, you never can go directly to the database.
Okay.
You only call database functions, and they really go
to the database.
Yeah, okay, I got it.
Thank you.
Okay.
So, any more questions?
No?
Well, let me show you one more thing.
Thank you.
And for those who like Mr. Schrödinger, there was a
little cartoon I found.